[draft] Components & Props (#314)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: content/essentials/components-and-props.mdx

## Component structure

Solid's approach to components is tied to its unique take on [reactivity](/essentials/intro-to-reactivity). 
A Solid component is created through functions that yield JSX elements. 
Once these functions have been initially executed, their lifecycle concludes. 
What this means is that the function is not reiterated when there's an change in the application's state. 

These functions can be aptly named [setup functions](#setup-functions), which are different from the **render functions** found in other frameworks. 
Solid's setup functions are executed just once, preparing everything to be observed by its reactive system. 
This distinction is subtle, yet fundamental for Solid's approach to component structure and reactivity.

### Setup functions

At the core of every Solid component is its setup function. 
This component function is executed once, during its initialization phase. 
This is why it's often referred to as a "setup" function. 
During this phase, the component sets up its reactive dependencies, event listeners, and other necessary configurations.

```typescript
function MyComponent() {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
  

>   console.log(count());

Author: What do you recommend as a change?

>   console.log(count());

Reviewer: I was imagining either `createEffect(() => console.log(count()))` or `onMount(() => console.log(count())` to make the reactive timing a bit more explicit (it's currently implicitly `console.log(untrack(count))`)

This ensures that when individual properties within the merged object change, their reactivity is not lost.

A common use case for `mergeProps` is when you want to provide default props:

```typescript
import { mergeProps } from 'solid-js';

function MyComponent(props) {
  // Using mergeProps to set default values for props
  const finalProps = mergeProps({ defaultName: "Ryan Carniato" }, props);
  
  return <div>Hello {finalProps.defaultName}</div>;
}

// Usage: <MyComponent defaultName="Ryan Carniato" />
```

In the example above, if no `defaultName` prop is provided when using `<MyComponent />`, it will default to `"Ryan Carniato"` because of `mergeProps`. 
If a value is provided, it will be used instead, all while retaining the reactivity of the `defaultName` prop.

### Destructuring props

Props objects are readonly and have reactive properties.
For this reason, when you destructure them you will lose reactivity if it is not done with a tracking scope, or if the reactive dependencies are not being tracked.

```typescript
function MyComponent(props) {
  const name = props.name // ❌: breaks reactivity and will not update when the prop value changes

>   const [name, setName] = createSignal(props.name) // ✓: createSignal is a Solid primitive that track prop value changes

Reviewer: Still think that comment is a bit incorrect, maybe we could do `const name = () => props.name` instead?

>   const [name, setName] = createSignal(props.name) // ✓: createSignal is a Solid primitive that track prop value changes

Author: see above suggestion

Crucially, all the returned props objects will preserve their reactivity.

This can be especially useful when you want to use certain props in the current component while passing others to child components:

```typescript
import { splitProps } from 'solid-js';

function ParentComponent(props) {
  // Splitting props into two groups: 'name' and 'age'
  const [greetingProps, personalInfoProps, restProps] = splitProps(props, ['name'], ['age']);
  
  // Using greetingProps and personalInfoProps in the current component
  return (
    <div>
      <Greeting {...greetingProps} />
      <PersonalInfo {...personalInfoProps} />
      {/* restProps can be passed down or used as needed */}
    </div>
  );
}
```
### Passing props to children

Solid's approach to performance revolves around ensuring components are lean and efficient. 
In essence, Solid components can be visualized as mere function calls. 

One of Solid's core strategies is using the compiler to wrap potentially reactive expressions within object [getters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/get). 

> This allows these props to be evaluated [lazily](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/Lazy_loading), delaying their execution until their actual use.

Reviewer: Drop this sentence, it's a bit misleading

```suggestion
```

> This approach promotes reactivity without the need for unnecessary [wrappers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Wrapper) or [synchronization](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Synchronous). However, it has certain implications for handling child components. Due to this lazy evaluation, direct access to props can result in the repeated creation of child components or elements, which is preferable to sidestep.

Reviewer: Technically, Solid compiles everything to unnecessary wrappers (also cool glossary link for wrapper). 

The synchronous glossary link looks incorrect to me

I think the lazy evaluation and repeated creation is a pretty advanced detail that should only be covered after advanced JSX compilation... Maybe just say reading props.children multiple times is unsafe and can cause problems like your code being slow?

Author: wrong in what way? it goes right to the MDN

Author: nvm i just removed it lol

Solid components are designed with reusability in mind. 
The initial configuration means that once a component is set up, it can be reused in different contexts without needing frequent reconfigurations. 
This plays a pivotal role throughout the component's lifecycle.

Having the proper connections and dependencies established from the outset optimizes performance and makes it easier to reuse components across various parts of an application or even across different projects. 

```tsx
function MyComponent() {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
  
  createEffect(() => console.log(count())) // 
  return (
    <div>
      <p>Count: {count()}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setCount(count() + 1)}>Increment</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

In this example, when `MyComponent` is used  (i.e., when it's rendered into the DOM for the first time), the function body is executed. 
This includes the creation of the `count` signal and the `console.log(count())` statement.
Once these lines are run, they will not be executed again for the life of this component instance, meaning the log statement will show only *once* in the console.

> The `return` statement provides JSX, which describes the structure and behavior of the component. 

Author: ```suggestion
The `return` statement provides JSX. 
Anything inside the JSX describes the structure and behavior of the component and is reactive. 
```

> The actual rendering part (what's inside the `return`), however, is reactive. 

Reviewer: Anything inside JSX, not anything after return. `let x = <>{props.x}</>` is reactive but `return props.x` is not.

> The actual rendering part (what's inside the `return`), however, is reactive. 

Author: ```suggestion
For instance, something like `let x = <>{props.x}</> `is reactive while a simple `return props.x` is not.
```

```typescript
import { mergeProps } from 'solid-js';

function MyComponent(props) {
  // Using mergeProps to set default values for props
  const finalProps = mergeProps({ defaultName: "Ryan Carniato" }, props);
  
  return <div>Hello {finalProps.defaultName}</div>;
}

// Usage: <MyComponent defaultName="Ryan Carniato" />
```

In the example above, if no `defaultName` prop is provided when using `<MyComponent />`, it will default to `"Ryan Carniato"` because of `mergeProps`. 
If a value is provided, it will be used instead, all while retaining the reactivity of the `defaultName` prop.

### Destructuring props

Props objects are typically readonly, ensuring that a child component does not directly modify the data belonging to its parent. 
This encourages one-way data flow, a pattern often seen to promote more predictable data management. 
Since the properties within the props object are reactive, special care is needed when working with them.

When destructuring props directly, you run the risk of breaking this reactivity, leading to potential unexpected behaviors in your components:

```typescript
function MyComponent(props) {

>   const name = props.name // ❌: breaks reactivity and will not update when the prop value changes

Author: ```suggestion
  const name = () => props.name // ❌: breaks reactivity and will not update when the prop value changes
```

Reviewer: I'm proposing this as a way to not break reactivity, which would be the line below

Author: OH got it thank you

# Components & Props

Components act as the foundational units for Solid applications. 
These modular code snippets allow for reusability and, when combined, facilitate the development of intricate applications.

Solid enables you to write reactive HTML through JSX. 

> In Solid, components are functions that start with a capital letter and return a JSX element:

Reviewer 2: > In Solid

This feels redundant and could probably be removed.

```typescript
function MyComponent() {
  return <div>Hello World</div>;
}
```
These components can be then integrated into other components or the primary application component:

```typescript
function App() {
  return (
    <div>
      <MyComponent />
    </div>
  );
}
```
## Component trees
In Solid, you display your page by calling `render` on a single component: the root of the component tree. 
At the apex of the tree resides the primary application component. 
Components can have none, one, or multiple child components nested within them. 
In essence, a component's children are the components it renders.

> A simple component tree, can be visualized as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can think of a simple component tree as:
```

└── Footer
```

The nesting capabilities of components underscore the potency since they provide a means to segment applications into finer, more controllable sections.

## Component lifecycles

Solid's approach to components is tied to its unique take on [reactivity](/essentials/intro-to-reactivity). 

The lifecycle of a Solid component ends once it has been initially run, meaning it will not be re-run when the application's state changes.
This is different from frameworks like React and Angular, where functions are defined and run with every application state change.

With a Solid component's initial run, it sets up a reactive system. 
This means that it monitors for specific state changes and makes adjustments to the relevant portions without the need to re-execute the entire component.
By bypassing the full component lifecycle on every state change, Solid has a more predictable behavior compared to frameworks that re-run functions on every update, like React. 

This approach emphasizes the importance of correctly establishing the initial reactive connections.
Since the component logic isn't continuously visited, getting this setup right is crucial when working with Solid.

> To learn more about the concept of reactivity, refer to [intro to reacticity](/essentials/intro-to-reacticity)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn more about the concept of reactivity, refer to [Intro to Reacticity](/essentials/intro-to-reacticity)
```

> For a more comprehensive understanding of Solid's unique take on reactivity, explore this guide on [understanding fine-grained reactivity](/guide/understanding-fine-grained-reacticity).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a more comprehensive understanding of Solid's unique take on reactivity, explore this guide on [Understanding Fine-Grained Reactivity](/guide/understanding-fine-grained-reacticity).
```

### Initialization & configuration

> During the first run of your component, Solid ensures the setup of reactive dependencies, event listeners, and other configurations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the first run of your component, Solid sets up the reactive dependencies, event listeners, and other configurations. 
```

In essence, Solid splits the concerns:

1. The component function body sets up state and side-effects.
2. The returned JSX where reactivity happens, updating the DOM as state changes, without re-executing the setup logic.

This separation ensures efficient updates while preserving the logic and behavior set during the initial phase.

### Conditional rendering

Solid allows for conditional rendering within components, allowing different parts of a component to be displayed based on state or other criteria. 
Given that the primary component function does not get re-invoked with changes of state, conditional statements must be directly placed within the function body. 
This design ensures that conditional paths are clear and immediately understood.

```typescript
function MyComponent() {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
  return (
    <div>
      {count() > 5 ? 
        <div>Count limit reached</div> :
        <>
          <p>Count: {count()}</p>
          <button onClick={() => setCount(count() + 1)}>Increment</button>
        </>
      }
    </div>
  );
}
```
<Aside>

> **Note**: To keep Solid components clean and simple, a useful way to restructure the example above is to introduce new components for each side of the ternary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: To keep Solid components clean and simple, a useful way to restructure the example above is to introduce new components for each side of the ternary.
```

</Aside>

In this example, the component will display `"Count limit reached"` when `count` exceeds 5.
Otherwise, it will display the current count with an increment button. 

> However, if the conditional was placed above the return statement, the component _would not_ show `"Count limit reached"`. This is due to the component itself not being reactive and being used only once when the state of `count`  is above 5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if the conditional was placed above the return statement, the component _would not_ show `"Count limit reached"`.
This is due to the component's lack of reactivity and single use when the state of `count` is above 5.
```

Reviewer 2: Right?

> Furthermore, Solid provides built-in control-flow components like [`<Show>`](/reference/show), which can be employed for a more declarative conditional rendering experience:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, Solid provides built-in control-flow components like [`<Show>`](/reference/show), which you can employ for a more declarative conditional rendering experience:
```

}
```

### `mergeProps`

In Solid, [`mergeProps`](/reference/mergeProps) is a utility function designed to merge multiple potentially reactive objects together. 
Its behavior is similar to [`Object.assign`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/assign) but with a key distinction: it retains the reactivity of the properties being merged.
This ensures that when individual properties within the merged object change, their reactivity is not lost.

A common use case for `mergeProps` is when you want to provide default props:

```typescript
import { mergeProps } from 'solid-js';

function MyComponent(props) {
  // Using mergeProps to set default values for props
  const finalProps = mergeProps({ defaultName: "Ryan Carniato" }, props);
  
  return <div>Hello {finalProps.defaultName}</div>;
}

// Usage: <MyComponent defaultName="Ryan Carniato" />
```

In the example above, if no `defaultName` prop is provided when using `<MyComponent />`, it will default to `"Ryan Carniato"` because of `mergeProps`. 
If a value is provided, it will be used instead, all while retaining the reactivity of the `defaultName` prop.

### Destructuring props

> Props objects are typically readonly, ensuring that a child component does not directly modify the data belonging to its parent. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Props objects are typically read-only, ensuring that a child component does not directly modify the data belonging to its parent. 
```

> This encourages one-way data flow, a pattern often seen to promote more predictable data management. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This encourages a one-way data flow, a pattern often seen to promote more predictable data management. 
```

It will return an array of props objects related to each set of keys, plus an additional props object containing any remaining keys. 
Crucially, all the returned props objects will preserve their reactivity.

This can be especially useful when you want to use certain props in the current component while passing others to child components:

```typescript
import { splitProps } from 'solid-js';

function ParentComponent(props) {
  // Splitting props into two groups: 'name' and 'age'
  const [greetingProps, personalInfoProps, restProps] = splitProps(props, ['name'], ['age']);
  
  // Using greetingProps and personalInfoProps in the current component
  return (
    <div>
      <Greeting {...greetingProps} />
      <PersonalInfo {...personalInfoProps} />
      {/* restProps can be passed down or used as needed */}
    </div>
  );
}
```
### Passing props to children

Solid's approach to performance revolves around ensuring components are lean and efficient. 

One of Solid's core strategies is to wrap potentially reactive expressions within object [getters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/get).

> Due to how these props are evaluated, however, accessing `props.children` multiple times can introduce problems and unexpected behaviours, such as repeated creation of child components or elements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to how these props are evaluated, however, accessing `props.children` multiple times can introduce problems and unexpected behaviors, such as repeated creation of child components or elements.
```
